.\" dross.1 — man page for the dross CLI + slash-command workflow.
.\" Render:  man ./docs/dross.1
.\" Print:   man -t ./docs/dross.1 | lpr        (PostScript to printer)
.\" PDF:     mandoc -T pdf docs/dross.1 > dross.pdf
.TH DROSS 1 2026-06-06 "dross 0.1" "Dross Manual"
.SH NAME
dross \- refine intent into verified code
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dross
.I command
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ flags ]
.br
.BI /dross\- name
.RI [ args ]
(inside a Claude Code session)
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dross
is a phase-based development workflow for AI pair programming: a small Go
CLI that owns mechanical state, plus seventeen Claude Code slash commands
(skills) that run the conversational workflows. All project artefacts are
plain TOML/JSON under
.IR .dross/ ,
readable and diffable.
.PP
The core contract: intent is refined stepwise \(em milestone, then phase
spec, then task plan, then atomic execution, then goal-backward
verification with mutation testing, then a clean PR. Pair-mode is the
default everywhere: the model proposes, the human steers, nothing is
written or committed past a gate the human didn't pass.
.SH THE LOOP
.nf
intent \(-> SPEC \(-> PLAN \(-> CODE \(-> TESTS \(-> EFFICACY PROOF \(-> VERIFY \(-> SHIP
        (lock) (waves) (atomic (per   (mutation +      (goal-   (PR)
                        commit) task)  coverage)        backward)
.fi
.PP
A
.B milestone
(e.g. v0.1) scopes success criteria and an ordered list of phases. Each
.B phase
lives on its own branch
.RI ( phase/<id> ,
created by
.BR "dross phase create" ),
carries a locked
.IR spec.toml ,
a wave-ordered
.IR plan.toml
whose tasks each name the files they touch, the criteria they cover, and a
specific test contract, and ends with
.IR verify.toml
recording a pass/partial/fail verdict backed by mutation testing. Shipping
pushes the branch and opens a PR; the provider's squash-merge collapses
per-task commits;
.B "dross phase complete"
fast-forwards main and deletes the branch.
.SH CLI COMMANDS
.SS Setup
.TP
.B dross init \fR[\fB--force\fR]
Bootstrap the
.I .dross/
scaffold in a greenfield repo (the
.B /dross-init
slash command fills it in conversationally).
.TP
.B dross onboard \fR[\fB--force\fR]
Adopt an existing repo by scanning signal files (package manifests, CI,
test layout).
.SS Orientation
.TP
.B dross status
Where am I \(em project, milestone, current phase, last activity, next
task. Also surfaces an open handoff and unfinalized verify verdicts.
.TP
.B dross doctor
Check project-level health:
.I project.toml
vs reality, foundational files, the linguist attribute, phase commits
leaked onto main.
.TP
.B dross validate
Schema-check every dross artefact (including that each task's
.I covers
references a real spec criterion).
.TP
.B dross version
Print version, commit, and build date.
.SS Artefact plumbing
.TP
.B dross project \fR{\fBshow\fR|\fBget\fR|\fBset\fR}
Read and edit
.I .dross/project.toml
by dotted path.
.TP
.B dross state \fR{\fBshow\fR|\fBset\fR|\fBtouch\fR|\fBbump\fR}
Read and edit
.IR .dross/state.json :
version, current milestone/phase/status, activity log.
.B bump internal
increments the 4-part version's quick-task counter.
.TP
.B dross milestone \fR{\fBlist\fR|\fBshow\fR|\fBcreate\fR|\fBget\fR|\fBset\fR|\fBadd\fR}
Manage milestones under
.IR .dross/milestones/ .
.B add
appends to list fields (success_criteria, non_goals, phases).
.TP
.B dross phase \fR{\fBlist\fR|\fBshow\fR|\fBcreate\fR|\fBcomplete\fR}
.B create
makes the next phase directory and checks out
.IR phase/<id> ;
.B complete
finalizes after squash-merge (ff main, delete local branch).
.TP
.B dross task \fR{\fBnext\fR|\fBshow\fR|\fBstatus\fR}
Inspect and update tasks within a phase plan.
.B next
prints the id of the next runnable task.
.TP
.B dross changes \fR{\fBrecord\fR|\fBshow\fR}
Append-only record of files touched per task during execute (commit hash
and notes optional).
.TP
.B dross rule \fR{\fBadd\fR|\fBlist\fR|\fBremove\fR|\fBenable\fR|\fBdisable\fR|\fBpromote\fR|\fBshow\fR}
Two-tier rules (global + project).
.B show
renders the merged set as the <rules> prompt block every workflow treats
as MUST-FOLLOW.
.B promote
moves a project rule to global scope.
.TP
.B dross profile \fR{\fBshow\fR|\fBseed\fR}
Read the user profile (global + project overrides).
.TP
.B dross defaults \fR{\fBshow\fR|\fBsave\fR}
Cross-project defaults at
.IR ~/.claude/dross/defaults.toml
(e.g. saving the current project's [remote] for future projects).
.SS Code insight
.TP
.B dross codex \fIfile\fR [\fIfile\fR...]
Polyglot code insight \(em symbols, refs, siblings, recent activity. Go
via stdlib AST; TS/TSX/Svelte/C#/GDScript via ast-grep shell-out, with
graceful degradation when ast-grep is absent.
.SS Verification
.TP
.B dross verify \fIphase-id\fR [\fB--skip-mutation\fR]
Run mutation testing per language (Stryker for TS/JS/Svelte, Gremlins for
Go, Stryker.NET for C#) and write
.I tests.json
plus a
.I verify.toml
skeleton.
.B --skip-mutation
records what would have been mutated without executing.
.TP
.B dross verify finalize \fIphase-id\fR
Record the resolved verdict from
.I verify.toml
as a telemetry outcome event.
.SS Shipping
.TP
.B dross ship \fR[\fIphase-id\fR] [\fIflags\fR]
Push
.I phase/<id>
and open a PR via the project's provider (GitHub or Forgejo/Gitea).
Gated on a
.I pass
verify verdict.
.RS
.TP
.B --title \fIs\fR, \fB--body \fIs\fR, \fB--body-file \fIf\fR
Override the generated PR title/body.
.TP
.B --draft
Open as draft.
.TP
.B --print-body
Print the generated body and exit (no push, no PR).
.TP
.B --no-push
Skip pushing and opening the PR.
.TP
.B --force
Force-with-lease the push after rewriting the branch.
.TP
.B --force-unverified
Skip the verify gate.
.RE
.TP
.B dross ship comment
Post a markdown comment to a PR (used by
.BR /dross-review ).
.TP
.B dross ship recover
One-shot migration for legacy repos with phase commits on main or
.I .dross/
stripped from prior PRs.
.SS Issue-board sync (opt-in)
.TP
.B dross issue \fR{\fBenable\fR|\fBdisable\fR|\fBmilestone-sync\fR|\fBphase-sync\fR|\fBquick\fR|\fBpull\fR|\fBdismiss\fR|\fBlink\fR|\fBlist\fR}
Mirror planning onto a Forgejo/Gitea board: milestone \(-> board
milestone, phase \(-> issue with a task checklist rendered from
.IR plan.toml ,
quick task \(-> standalone issue.
.B pull
lists inbound issues for triage. Off by default;
.B enable
needs [remote] provider, api_base, and auth_env. Sync calls are no-ops
when disabled, so workflows always run them. Links live in
.IR .dross/board.json .
.SS Settings and telemetry
.TP
.B dross env \fR{\fBlist\fR|\fBset\fR|\fBunset\fR}
Manage env keys in
.I ~/.claude/settings.json
\(em values are entered with hidden input and never displayed.
.TP
.B dross stats \fR{\fBshow\fR|\fBpath\fR|\fBopt-in\fR|\fBopt-out\fR}
Aggregate views over the local telemetry log; toggle the recorder.
.SH SLASH COMMANDS
Run inside a Claude Code session. Pair-mode is the default: propose \(->
steer \(-> write. Boldface flags are typed as part of the command's
arguments.
.SS Setup and settings
.TP
.B /dross-init
Greenfield bootstrap \(em vision, stack, scaffold, runtime, rules,
verification setup.
.TP
.B /dross-onboard
Adopt an existing repo \(em scan signals, capture runtime, import rules.
.TP
.B /dross-options
Review and update every dross-managed setting \(em project, defaults,
rules, profile, env vars.
.TP
.B /dross-rule
Add, list, remove, or promote rules in the two-tier rules system.
.SS Planning
.TP
.B /dross-milestone \fIversion\fR
Scope a milestone \(em title, success criteria, non-goals, phase order.
.TP
.B /dross-spec \fR[\fIphase-id\fR | \fB--new \fI"Title"\fR]
Clarify a phase into
.IR spec.toml :
acceptance criteria, locked decisions, deferred ideas. With no args,
offers to scaffold the next phase when nothing else is in flight.
.TP
.B /dross-plan \fR[\fIphase-id\fR] [\fB--panel\fR] [\fB--no-review\fR]
Decompose the locked spec into a wave-ordered task graph with per-task
test contracts. With
.BR --panel ,
three cold lens planners (risk-first / MVP-first / verification-first)
draft independently in parallel and a fourth cold judge merges them,
surfacing lens
.I disagreements
as the steering agenda instead of auto-resolving them (~4\(en5\(mu the
tokens of a single-pass plan; meant for new subsystems and non-obvious
task graphs). After
.I plan.toml
is locked, the independent plan review runs automatically in its own
context unless
.B --no-review
is passed; blocking findings loop back into steering with exactly one
re-review.
.TP
.B /dross-plan-review \fR[\fIphase-id\fR]
Independent second-opinion audit of
.I plan.toml
by a fresh subagent reading the artefacts cold. Findings land in
.I REVIEW.md
classified BLOCKING / FLAG / NOTE. Also auto-run by
.BR /dross-plan .
.SS Execution
.TP
.B /dross-execute \fR[\fIphase-id\fR] [\fB--solo\fR] [\fB--from \fItask-id\fR]
Execute the plan task by task: atomic commit per task, test gate before
each commit. Pair-mode asks before every task;
.B --solo
runs autonomously.
.TP
.B /dross-quick \fI"task description"\fR
One-shot task outside a plan, with the same atomic-commit + test-gate
guarantees. Pair-mode only. Bumps the version's internal counter.
.SS Verification and shipping
.TP
.B /dross-verify \fR[\fIphase-id\fR] [\fB--skip-mutation\fR]
Goal-backward verification: run mutation tests, map each acceptance
criterion to the specific tests that prove it, decide pass/partial/fail.
.TP
.B /dross-ship
Open a clean PR for a verified phase \(em push, open PR via provider,
request reviewers, watch CI, gate the merge, clean up branches.
.TP
.B /dross-review \fIpr-number\fR [\fB--phase \fIid\fR]
Four-lens subagent panel (security / quality / tests / spec-fidelity)
over an open PR; posts the aggregated findings as a single comment.
.SS Continuity
.TP
.B /dross-status
Where am I \(em project, milestone, current phase, last activity,
suggested next step.
.TP
.B /dross-pause
Capture a handoff before stopping \(em mental thread, next action, open
loops \(->
.IR .dross/handoff.md .
.TP
.B /dross-resume
Replay the handoff, re-orient on phase/branch/diff, prune done items.
.TP
.B /dross-inbox \fR[\fB--labels \fIbug,enhancement\fR]
Triage inbound board issues into milestones, phases, or quick tasks.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I .dross/project.toml
Stack, paths, runtime mode and test command, [remote] provider config.
.TP
.I .dross/state.json
4-part version, current milestone/phase/status, activity log.
.TP
.I .dross/rules.toml
Project-tier rules.
.TP
.I .dross/milestones/<version>.toml
Milestone scope.
.TP
.I .dross/phases/<id>/
.IR spec.toml ,
.IR plan.toml ,
.IR verify.toml ,
.IR tests.json ,
.I REVIEW.md
(plan review), and
.I panel/
(lens drafts + synthesis when
.B --panel
was used).
.TP
.I .dross/changes.json
Files touched per task.
.TP
.I .dross/board.json
Artefact \(<-> issue links for board sync.
.TP
.I .dross/handoff.md
Living pause/resume handoff (gitignored).
.TP
.I ~/.claude/dross/defaults.toml
Cross-project defaults.
.TP
.I ~/.claude/dross/rules.toml
Global-tier rules.
.TP
.I ~/.claude/dross/prompts/
Workflow prompt files (symlinked to the checkout by
.BR "make install" ).
.TP
.I ~/.claude/dross/telemetry.jsonl
Local-only usage event log.
.TP
.I ~/.claude/skills/dross-*/SKILL.md
Installed slash commands (symlinks).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DROSS_NO_TELEMETRY=1
Disable telemetry for this invocation regardless of the persisted opt-in.
.TP
.RI [ remote ]. auth_env
Not a fixed variable: the project's
.I project.toml
names which env var holds the provider token (e.g. FORGEJO_TOKEN,
GITHUB_TOKEN). Set it via
.BR "dross env set" .
.SH TELEMETRY
Local file, no network, no daemon, no third party. One JSONL event per
invocation (command path, duration, exit code, error bucket) plus outcome
events from verify, ship, phase create, and doctor. Nothing you typed is
recorded \(em counts and small enums only; the catch-all
.I other
error bucket carries a path-redacted copy of dross's own error string.
Default ON, asked once at init/onboard. Toggle with
.B dross stats opt-out
/
.BR opt-in .
.SH EXAMPLES
A full phase, end to end:
.PP
.nf
$ dross phase create            # scaffolds .dross/phases/NN-slug/, checks out phase/NN-slug
> /dross-spec                   # lock criteria + decisions into spec.toml
> /dross-plan --panel           # 3-lens panel + cold judge; auto plan review after lock
> /dross-execute                # task by task, atomic commits, test gates
> /dross-verify                 # mutation testing + criterion mapping
> /dross-ship                   # PR, CI watch, merge gate
$ dross phase complete NN-slug  # after squash-merge: ff main, delete branch
.fi
.PP
Quick orientation and a one-off fix:
.PP
.nf
$ dross status
> /dross-quick "rename the legacy env var in the README and CI"
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR README.md
in the repository root (footprint numbers, roadmap, design notes);
.I Brief.md
for the original design brief.
.PP
Repository:
.I https://github.com/Rivil/dross
.SH COLOPHON
Dross is the AI sidekick from Will Wight's
.IR Cradle
series \(em a Presence that compiles battle plans and handles unimportant
thoughts to free up his person's bandwidth.
